# SO - Operating Systems
Laboratory of Operating Systems, Computer Science Course - A.Y. 2021/2022  
Department of Computer Science, University of Turin  
Teachers: Enrico Bini

## Lab project
We intend to simulate a ledger containing the data of monetary transactions between different users.

Inside the folder there is a `macro.txt` file which contains all the parameters to be read at run time. They are read by the `read_macro(argv[1])` function present in the `master.c`, `users.c` and `nodes.c` files. The `header.h` file includes all the libraries needed for the correct execution of the program, the keys for semaphores and shared memories are defined, the parameters to be read at compile time are defined and the following structures are defined:
* **transaction**: structure of a transaction that contains the timestamp, sender, receiver, quantity and reward fields.
* **p_info**: structure that allows you to have information about a process and contains the fields `proc_pid` (PID of the process), `proc_balance` (balance of the process), `pos` (position of the process in the shared memory), `term` (process terminated or not)
* **block**: structure of a block of the ledger which contains the fields `array_trans` (array of transactions of size `SO_BLOCK_SIZE`) and `id` (numeric identifier of the block)
* **message**: structure of the message to be sent to the message queues which contains the fields `mtype` (type of the message) and `mtext` (text of the message)
In the `master.h`, `users.h` and `nodes.h` files the method signatures are declared, used in the respective files.
The `master_functions.c` file implements the methods that are used in `master.c`, the `users_functions.c` file implements the methods that are used in `users.c`, and the `nodes_functions.c` file implements the methods that are used in `nodes.c`.

### Master
Initially the parameters from the `macro.txt` file are read and values are assigned to the macros. It uses the `sigaction()` system call to handle signals and a `handle_signal(sig)` function is defined to handle signals that may occur during simulation. Creates shared memory for the block counter in the ledger, for the `p_info` structure with process information, and for the ledger. Create semaphore to write to ledger and create semaphore to wait for all processes to be created. Subsequently, through a loop of length `SO_USERS_NUM` + `SO_NODES_NUM` and a `fork()`, it creates the child processes users and nodes, places them in shared memory and calls `execvp()` for both users and nodes. Once the process creation wait is over, thanks to the semaphore of the `SEMKEY_P_INFO` set, it decreases the latter and the simulation starts. Set an `alarm()` of `SO_SIM_SEC` and enter the `while(1)` loop, where a second wait is set, for subsequent printouts, with the `one_sec_waited_master()` function. Update the number of terminated users, subtract them from the active ones and check if they are all terminated or if only one is left alive (who cannot send transactions to anyone else). (In these two cases, print the termination with the `print_end()` function and send a simulation end signal). With the `print_proc()` function, print the PID of the processes, their balance and whether they are finished or not. Finally, it prints the number of terminated users, active users and nodes, and blocks written to the ledger. After the simulation, deallocate all the IPC resources.

### Users
Initially the parameters from the `macro.txt` file are read and values are assigned to the macros. It uses the `sigaction()` system call to handle signals and a `handle_signal(sig)` function is defined to handle signals that may occur during simulation. Stores the memory identifiers for the block counter in the ledger, for the `p_info` structure with process information, and for the ledger in variables. It also saves the semaphore set identifier `SEMKEY_P_INFO`. Wait for the green light to run the simulation through semaphores, using the `wait_for_zero()` function. With a loop `for(j = 0; j < SO_USERS_NUM; j++)` it recovers its position in shared memory and initializes three variables: `balance`, `index_blocks` and `attempt`, respectively the balance of the process, the index of blocks read and the transaction sending attempts. Set an `alarm(rand() % SO_SIM_SEC + 1)` to generate the `SIGALRM` signal chosen by us to send a transaction. It enters the `while(attempt != SO_RETRY)` loop and exits when it has failed to send a transaction `SO_RETRY` consecutive times. Inside the `while(attempt != SO_RETRY)` it calculates the budget with `budget_calc()`, initializes the transaction with `trans_init()` and sets it up and sends it to the node via `trans_send()`. Exited the `while(attempt != SO_RETRY)` update the term field to true of the struct `p_info` and terminate.
